
Health Conditions
Discover
Plan
Connect
Shop

Subscribe

PARENTHOOD
Stages
Infertility
Health & Well-Being
Life
Sex & Relationships
Products & Gear

Eclampsia
Symptoms
Causes
Risk factors
Diagnosis
Treatment
Outlook
What is eclampsia?
Eclampsia is a severe complication of preeclampsia. It’s a rare but serious condition where high blood pressure results in seizures during pregnancy.

Seizures are periods of disturbed brain activity that can cause episodes of staring, decreased alertness, and convulsions (violent shaking). Eclampsia affects about 1 in every 200 women with preeclampsia. You can develop eclampsia even if you don’t have a history of seizures.

What are the symptoms of eclampsia?
Because preeclampsia can lead to eclampsia, you may have symptoms of both conditions. However, some of your symptoms may be due to other conditions, such as kidney disease or diabetes. It’s important to tell your doctor about any conditions you have so they may rule out other possible causes.

The following are common symptoms of preeclampsia:

elevated blood pressure
swelling in your face or hands
headaches
excessive weight gain
nausea and vomiting
vision problems, including episodes with loss of vision or blurry vision
difficulty urinating
abdominal pain, especially in the right upper abdomen
Patients with eclampsia can have the same symptoms as those noted above, or may even present with no symptoms prior to the onset of eclampsia. The following are common symptoms of eclampsia:

seizures
loss of consciousness
agitation
What causes eclampsia?
Eclampsia often follows preeclampsia, which is characterized by high blood pressure occurring in pregnancy and, rarely, postpartum. Other findings may also be present such as protein in the urine. If your preeclampsia worsens and affects your brain, causing seizures, you have developed eclampsia.

Doctors don’t know for sure what causes preeclampsia, but it’s thought to result from abnormal formation and function of the placenta. They can explain how the symptoms of preeclampsia may lead to eclampsia.

High blood pressure
Preeclampsia is when your blood pressure, or the force of blood against the walls of your arteries, becomes high enough to damage your arteries and other blood vessels. Damage to your arteries may restrict blood flow. It can produce swelling in the blood vessels in your brain and to your growing baby. If this abnormal blood flow through vessels interferes with your brain’s ability to function, seizures may occur.

Proteinuria
Preeclampsia commonly affects kidney function. Protein in your urine, also known as proteinuria, is a common sign of the condition. Each time you have a doctor’s appointment, your urine may be tested for protein.

Typically, your kidneys filter waste from your blood and create urine from these wastes. However, the kidneys try to retain nutrients in the blood, such as protein, for redistribution to your body. If the kidneys’ filters, called glomeruli, are damaged, protein can leak through them and excrete into your urine.

Who is at risk for eclampsia?
If you have or have had preeclampsia, you may be at risk for eclampsia.

Other risk factors for developing eclampsia during pregnancy include:

gestational or chronic hypertension (high blood pressure)
being older than 35 years or younger than 20 years
pregnancy with twins or triplets
first-time pregnancy
diabetes or another condition that affects your blood vessels
kidney disease
Eclampsia and your baby
Preeclampsia and eclampsia affect the placenta, which is the organ that delivers oxygen and nutrients from the mother’s blood to the fetus. When high blood pressure reduces blood flow through the vessels, the placenta may be unable to function properly. This may result in your baby being born with a low birth weight or other health problems.

Problems with the placenta often require preterm delivery for the health and safety of the baby. In rare cases, these conditions cause stillbirth.

How is eclampsia diagnosed?
If you already have a preeclampsia diagnosis or have a history of it, your doctor will order tests to determine if your preeclampsia has happened again or gotten worse. If you don’t have preeclampsia, your doctor will order tests for preeclampsia as well as others to determine why you’re having seizures. These tests can include:

Blood tests
Your doctor may order several types of blood tests to assess your condition. These tests include a complete blood count, which measures how many red blood cells you have in your blood, and a platelet count to see how well your blood is clotting. Blood tests will also help examine your kidney and liver function.

Creatinine test
Creatinine is a waste product created by the muscles. Your kidneys should filter most of the creatinine from your blood, but if the glomeruli get damaged, excess creatinine will remain in the blood. Having too much creatinine in your blood may indicate preeclampsia, but it doesn’t always.

Urine tests
Your doctor may order urine tests to check for the presence of protein and its excretion rate.

What are the treatments for eclampsia?
Delivering your baby and placenta are the recommended treatment for preeclampsia and eclampsia. Your doctor will consider the severity of the disease and how mature your baby is when recommending timing of delivery.

If your doctor diagnoses you with mild preeclampsia, they may monitor your condition and treat you with medication to prevent it from turning into eclampsia. Medications and monitoring will help keep your blood pressure within a safer range until the baby is mature enough to deliver.

If you do develop severe preeclampsia or eclampsia, your doctor may deliver your baby early. Your care plan will depend on how far along you are in your pregnancy and the severity of your disease. You will need to be hospitalized for monitoring until you deliver your baby.

Medications
Medications to prevent seizures, called anticonvulsants drugs, may be necessary. You may need medication to lower blood pressure if you have high blood pressure. You may also receive steroids, which can help your baby’s lungs mature prior to delivery.

What is the long-term outlook?
Your symptoms should resolve within days to weeks after you have your baby. That said, you will still have a greater chance of blood pressure issues in your next pregnancy and possibly later in lifeTrusted Source. It’s important to follow up for postpartum blood pressure checks and exams after delivering your baby to ensure the disease is resolving.

If complications occur during the pregnancy, you may have a medical emergency such as placental abruption. Placental abruption is a condition that causes the placenta to detach from the uterus. This requires immediate emergency cesarean delivery to save the baby.

The baby may be very ill or may even die. Complications to the mother can be quite severe, including risk of deathTrusted Source from stroke or cardiac arrest.

However, getting the proper medical care for preeclampsia may prevent progression of the disease into a more severe form such as eclampsia. Go to your prenatal visits as recommended by your doctor to have your blood pressure, blood, and urine monitored. Make sure to talk to your doctor about any symptoms you have, as well.

Last medically reviewed on September 12, 2018

ParenthoodPregnancy
 9 sourcesexpanded

Healthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical associations. We avoid using tertiary references. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.
Dulay AT. (n.d.). Preeclampsia and eclampsia.
merckmanuals.com/home/women-s-health-issues/complications-of-pregnancy/preeclampsia-and-eclampsia
Hypertension in pregnancy. (2013).
acog.org/Resources-And-Publications/Task-Force-and-Work-Group-Reports/Hypertension-in-Pregnancy
Liu S, et al. (2011). Incidence, risk factors, and associated complications of eclampsia. DOI:
10.1097/AOG.0b013e31823311c1
Mayo Clinic Staff. (2018). Preeclampsia.
mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/preeclampsia/symptoms-causes/syc-20355745
Okanloma KA, et al. (2000). Neurological complications associated with the pre-eclampsia/eclampsia syndrome.
popline.org/node/173204
Overview: Pre-eclampsia. (2018).
nhs.uk/conditions/pre-eclampsia/
Preeclampsia and hypertension in pregnancy: Resource overview. (n.d.).
acog.org/Womens-Health/Preeclampsia-and-Hypertension-in-Pregnancy
Theilen LH, et al. (2018). Long-term mortality risk and life expectancy following recurrent hypertensive disease of pregnancy. DOI:
10.1016/j.ajog.2018.04.002
WHO recommendations for prevention and treatment of pre-eclampsia and eclampsia. (2011).
apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/44703/1/9789241548335_eng.pdf
Medically reviewed by Holly Ernst, PA-C — Written by Brindles Lee Macon on September 12, 2018

READ THIS NEXT
Treatment of Preeclampsia: Magnesium Sulfate Therapy
Medically reviewed by Holly Ernst, PA-C
Magnesium sulfate therapy is used to prevent seizures in women with preeclampsia. It can also help prolong pregnancy for up to two days. This allows…

READ MORE
Preeclampsia: Causes, Diagnosis, and Treatments
Medically reviewed by Mia Armstrong, MD
Preeclampsia is when you have high blood pressure and protein in your urine during pregnancy or after delivery. Learn about symptoms, treatment, and…

READ MORE
Severe Preeclampsia: Possible Complications at Each Stage of Pregnancy
Medically reviewed by Holly Ernst, PA-C
Preeclampsia occurs only during pregnancy. In order to cure this disorder, your doctor may need to induce labor and deliver your baby. Depending on…

READ MORE
Creatinine Blood Test
Medically reviewed by Carissa Stephens, R.N., CCRN, CPN
A creatinine blood test measures the level of creatinine, a waste product, in the blood. Learn how to prepare for it, what to expect, and what the…

READ MORE
Why Some Doctors Are Recommending Low Dose Aspirin for Pregnant Women
Low dose aspirin has been a common treatment for pregnant women with a risk of preeclampsia. Now, doctors at the University of Texas are prescribing…

READ MORE
Beyoncé’s Honesty Highlights Racial Disparities in Maternal Healthcare
The iconic music star talked openly about developing preeclampsia while pregnant with twins in her new documentary, “Homecoming.” Her honesty is…

READ MORE
Get our wellness newsletter
Filter out the noise and nurture your inbox with health and wellness advice that’s inclusive and rooted in medical expertise.

Enter your email
Your privacy is important to us

About Us
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Privacy Settings
Advertising Policy
Health Topics
Medical Affairs
Content Integrity
Newsletters
© 2005-2022 Healthline Media a Red Ventures Company. All rights reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.
AboutCareersAdvertise with us
OUR BRANDS

Healthline
Medical News Today
Greatist
Psych Central



Grow by WebMD
PREGNANCY
BABY
PARENTING
Pregnancy  Reference
Preeclampsia
 Reviewed by Kecia Gaither, MD, MPH on December 13, 2019
Preeclampsia and Eclampsia
ABOUT

TRANSCRIPT

IN THIS ARTICLE
What Is Preeclampsia? Preeclampsia Symptoms When Do Symptoms Show Up? Preeclampsia Causes Other High Blood Pressure Disorders in Pregnancy Preeclampsia Risk Factors Preeclampsia Complications Preeclampsia Diagnosis Preeclampsia Treatment Preeclampsia Prevention
What Is Preeclampsia?
Preeclampsia, formerly called toxemia, is when pregnant women have high blood pressure, protein in their urine, and swelling in their legs, feet, and hands. It can range from mild to severe. It usually happens late in pregnancy, though it can come earlier or just after delivery.

Preeclampsia can lead to eclampsia, a serious condition that can have health risks for mom and baby and, in rare cases, cause death. If your preeclampsia leads to seizures, you have eclampsia.

The only cure for preeclampsia is to give birth. Even after delivery, symptoms of preeclampsia can last 6 weeks or more.

You can help protect yourself by learning the symptoms of preeclampsia and by seeing your doctor for regular prenatal care. Catching preeclampsia early may lower the chances of long-term problems for both mom and baby.

Preeclampsia Symptoms
In addition to swelling (also called edema), protein in the urine, and blood pressure over 130/80, preeclampsia symptoms include:

 Weight gain over 1 or 2 days because of a large increase in bodily fluid
Shoulder pain
Belly pain, especially in the upper right side
Severe headaches
Change in reflexes or mental state
Peeing less or not at all
 Dizziness
 Trouble breathing
Severe vomiting and nausea
 Vision changes like flashing lights, floaters, or blurry vision
Some women with preeclampsia don’t have any symptoms, so it’s important to see your doctor for regular blood pressure checks and urine tests.

When Do Symptoms Show Up?
Preeclampsia can happen as early as 20 weeks into pregnancy, but that’s rare. Symptoms often begin after 34 weeks. In a few cases, symptoms develop after birth, usually within 48 hours of delivery. They tend to go away on their own.

Preeclampsia Causes
Many experts think preeclampsia and eclampsia happen when a woman’s placenta doesn’t work the way it should, but they don’t know exactly why. Some think poor nutrition or high body fat might contribute. A lack of blood flow to the uterus could play a role. Genes are also a factor.

Other High Blood Pressure Disorders in Pregnancy
Preeclampsia is one of four blood pressure disorders in pregnant women. The other three are:

Gestational hypertension. This is high blood pressure that starts after the 20th week of pregnancy but doesn’t cause high amounts of protein in a woman’s urine. It usually goes away after delivery.
Chronic hypertension. This is high blood pressure that starts before a woman gets pregnant or before the 20th week of pregnancy.
Chronic hypertension with superimposed preeclampsia. This is chronic high blood pressure that gets worse as pregnancy goes on, causing more protein in urine and other complications.
Preeclampsia Risk Factors
Things that can increase your chance of getting preeclampsia include:

Being a teen or woman over 40
Being African American
Being pregnant for the first time
Having babies less than 2 years apart or more than 10 years apart
Pregnancy with a new partner instead of the father of your previous children
High blood pressure before getting pregnant
A history of preeclampsia
A mother or sister who had preeclampsia
A history of obesity
Carrying more than one baby
In-vitro fertilization
A history of diabetes, kidney disease, lupus, or rheumatoid arthritis
Preeclampsia Complications
Preeclampsia can keep your placenta from getting enough blood, which can cause your baby to be born very small. This is called fetal growth restriction.

It’s also one of the most common causes of premature births and the complications that can follow, including learning disabilities, epilepsy, cerebral palsy, and hearing and vision problems.

Preeclampsia can cause rare but serious complications that include:

Stroke
Seizure
Fluid buildup in your chest
Heart failure
Reversible blindness
Bleeding from your liver
Bleeding after you've given birth
When preeclampsia or eclampsia damages your liver and blood cells, you can get a complication called HELLP syndrome. That stands for:

Hemolysis. This is when the red blood cells that carry oxygen through your body break down.
Elevated liver enzymes. High levels of these chemicals in your blood mean liver problems.
Low platelet counts. This is when you don’t have enough platelets, so your blood doesn’t clot the way it should.
HELLP syndrome is a medical emergency. Call 911 or go to the emergency room if you have symptoms including:

Blurry vision
Chest or belly pain
Headache
Fatigue
Upset stomach or vomiting
Swelling in your face or hands
Bleeding from your gums or nose
Preeclampsia can also cause your placenta to suddenly separate from your uterus, which is called placental abruption. This can lead to stillbirth.

Preeclampsia Diagnosis
You have preeclampsia if you have high blood pressure and at least one of these other signs:

Too much protein in your urine
Not enough platelets in your blood
High levels of kidney-related chemicals in your blood
High levels of liver-related chemicals in your blood
Fluid in your lungs
A new headache that doesn’t go away when you take medication
To confirm a diagnosis, your doctor might give you tests including:

Blood tests to check your platelets and to look for kidney or liver chemicals
Urine tests to measure proteins
Ultrasounds, nonstress tests, or biophysical profiles to see how your baby is growing
Preeclampsia Treatment
The only cure for preeclampsia and eclampsia is to give birth. Your doctor will talk with you about when to deliver based on how far along your baby is, how well your baby is doing in your womb, and the severity of your preeclampsia.

If your baby has developed well, usually by 37 weeks or later, your doctor may want to induce labor or do a cesarean section. This will keep preeclampsia from getting worse.

If your baby isn’t close to term, you and your doctor may be able to treat mild preeclampsia until your baby has developed enough to be safely delivered. The closer the birth is to your due date, the better it is for your baby.

If you have mild preeclampsia, also known as preeclampsia without severe features, your doctor may prescribe:

Bed rest, either at home or in the hospital; resting mostly on your left side
Careful monitoring with a fetal heart rate monitor and frequent ultrasounds
Medicines to lower your blood pressure
Blood and urine tests
Your doctor also may tell you to stay in the hospital so they can watch you closely. In the hospital, you might get:

Medicine to help prevent seizures, lower your blood pressure, and prevent other problems
Steroid injections to help your baby's lungs develop faster
Other treatments include:

Injections of magnesium to prevent eclampsia-related seizures
Hydralazine or another blood pressure drug
For severe preeclampsia, your doctor may need to deliver your baby right away, even if you're not close to term. Afterward, symptoms of preeclampsia should go away within 1 to 6 weeks but could last longer.

Preeclampsia Prevention
If you have a greater chance of getting preeclampsia, talk to your doctor about making lifestyle changes that can help keep you healthy. You might need to:

Lose some weight if you’re overweight
Stop smoking
Exercise regularly
Get your blood pressure or blood sugar under control
Your doctor might also tell you to take a low-dose (81 milligram) aspirin each day. But don’t take any medications, vitamins, or supplements without talking to them first.

 SHOW SOURCES
Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on PinterestEmail
© 2019 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.View privacy policy and trust info 

TOP PICKS
FURTHER READING
Preeclampsia
High-Risk Pregnancy and the Biophysical Profile
High-Risk Pregnancies: Symptoms, Doctors, Support, and More
Pre-eclampsia and Eclampsia: Causes and Treatments
High-Risk Pregnancy Topics 
RECOMMENDED FOR YOU
slideshow fetal development
See How Your Baby Grows Each Month
pregnancy first trimester warning signs
Why Your Favorite Foods Gross You Out
beautiful twins
What You Should Know About Multiple Births
Woman trying on dress in store
Your Guide to a Beautiful Pregnancy
pregnant woman
7 Embarrassing Pregnancy Symptoms
Woman looking at pregnancy test
Early Signs of Pregnancy
calendar and baby buggy
Due Date Calculator
dark chocolate squares
12 Easy, Yummy Snacks for Pregnant Women
Get Pregnancy & Parenting Tips In Your Inbox
Doctor-approved information to keep you and your family healthy and happy.
Pregnancy & Baby Bulletin
Parenting & Children's Health
Enter your email address
SUBSCRIBE
By clicking Subscribe, I agree to the WebMD Terms & Conditions & Privacy Policy and understand that I may opt out of WebMD subscriptions at any time.
Health Solutions
Penis Curved When Erect?
Could I have CAD?
Treat Bent Fingers
Treat HR+, HER2- MBC
Tired of Dandruff?
Benefits of CBD
Rethink MS Treatment
AFib-Related Strokes
Risk of a Future DVT/PE
Is My Penis Normal?
Relapsing MS Options
Liver Transplants Save Lives
Finance Plastic Surgery
Bent Finger Causes
Living With Psoriasis?
Missing Teeth?
More from WebMD
5 Tips to Help With Relapsing MS
How to Thrive With Narcolepsy
Relief for Blocked Hair Follicles
Psoriatic Arthritis and Your Sleep
What Psoriasis Feels Like
First Psoriatic Arthritis Flare
Talking to Your Doctor About RA
Crohn's: A 'Full-Body' Disease
Avoiding Crohn’s Flares
Health Benefits of Hemp Seed Oil
Live Better With Psoriatic Disease
Types of B-Cell Therapy for MS
5 Health Benefits of Hemp
Why Prostate Cancer Spreads
Living with Advanced Breast Cancer
Where Breast Cancer Spreads
Logo for WebMD
POLICIES
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Editorial Policy
Advertising Policy
Correction Policy
Terms of Use
  
ABOUT
Contact Us
About WebMD
Careers
Newsletter
Corporate
WebMD Health Services
Site Map
Accessibility
  
WEBMD NETWORK
Medscape
Medscape Reference
MedicineNet
eMedicineHealth
RxList
OnHealth
WebMDRx
First Aid
WebMD Magazine
WebMD Health Record
Dictionary
Physician Directory
  
OUR APPS
WebMD Mobile
WebMD App
Pregnancy
Baby
Allergy
Medscape
  
FOR ADVERTISERS
Advertise with Us
Advertising Policy
 
TRUSTeTAG Registered SealHoncode SealAdchoices
© 2005 - 2022 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.

WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.

See additional information.

 
